#BCI 433 - IBMi Business Computing


Notes from following the snippets of the online course BCI 433 I could find.


## Useful Links
* [IBMi 7.3 Documentation](https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/ssw_ibm_i_73/rzahg/welcome.htm)
* [RPGLE 7.3 Documentation](https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/en/ssw_ibm_i_73/rzasd/rzasdmain.htm)


## Programming Languages
* **Control Language (CL)** - Communication with the operating system. Similar concept to Unix shell.
* **Report Program Generator (RPG)** - How to access the database (DB2).
* **Data Description Specifications (DDS)** - How to define the database.
* **CMD** - The language used to write commands.


## CL Commands
* Libaries
  * ```CHGCURLIB BOLIB``` - Change current library
  * ```DSPLIB *CURLIB``` - Display current library
  * ```ADDLIBLE SOMELIB``` - Add a library to library list of **session**
  * ```RMVLIBLE SOMELIB``` - Remove a library from library list
* Files
  * ```CRTSRCPF``` - Create source physical file
  * ```WRKMBRPDM BOLIB/QCLSRC``` - Work with CL Source file
  * ```CRTCLPGM``` - Create CL Program
* PDM
  * ```WRKLIBPDM``` - Work with libraries
  * ```WRKOBJPDM``` - Work with objects
  * ```WRKMBRPDM``` - Work with members
* User Profiles
  * ```DSPUSRPRF``` - Display user profile 
  * ```DSPAUTUSR``` - Display authorized users
  * ```CHGUSRPRF``` - Change user preferences
* Misc
  * ```DSPMSG``` - Display messages
  * ```WRKSPLF``` - Work with spool files
  * ```WRKACTJOB``` - Shows all the jobs that are currently running and their status.


## Common Function Keys
* ```F1``` Help
* ```F2``` Extended Help
* ```F3``` Exit
* ```F4``` Prompt
* ```F5``` Refresh Screen
* ```F9``` Retrieve previous command
* ```F12``` Cancel
* ```F23 (SHIFT+F11)``` More options
* ```F24 (SHIFT+F12)``` More function keys


## SEU Editor Commands
* **I** - Insert a line
* **D** - Delete a line
* **C** - Copy a line
* **M** - Move a line
* **A** - Paste after
* **B** - Paste before
* **CC,CC** - Copy multiple lines
* **DD,DD** - Delete multiple lines
* **MM,MM** - Move multiple lines


## Jobs
* **Job** - Any and every piece of work on the AS/400.
* **Interactive Job** - Begins when user signs onto system, ends when signing off. Runs in subsystem **QINTER**
* **Batch Job** 
  * Runs in the background. 
  * Typically use a lot of resources and are low priority. 
  * Usually started by interactive jobs. 
  * Runs in subsystem **QBATCH**


## Queues
* A line up, where things wait.
* **Job queue** - Where batch jobs wait.
* **Message-queue** - Where messages wait.
* **Output-queue** - Where spool files wait to print.


## Objects
* **Objects** - Entities on the server that take up space, have a description, and are not considered temporary. Messages are not objects since they are read and then destroyed. 
* If no library is specified, an object is stored in **QGPL**.
* On iSeries, everything is an object; On Unix/Windows, everything is a file.
* On iSeries, objects have **types**. On Unix/Windows, files have extensions (.txt).
* Common object types: libraries, files, job queues, programs.
* **Object types and attributes**
  * ```*FILE``` - ```PF-SCR``` - Created when creating a source physical file (```QCLLESRC```)
  * ```*PGM```  - ```CLLE```   - Created when compiling CL code (```MYCLPGM```)
  * ```*PGM```  - ```RPGLE```  - Created when compiling RPG code (```MYRPGPGM```)
  * ```*FILE``` - ```PF-DTA``` - Created when compiling DDS code to create physical file (```STUDENTS```)
  * ```*FILE``` - ```DSPF```   - Created when compiling DDS code to produce a display file (```MYDSP```)
* [All Object Types](https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/ssw_ibm_i_73/cl/wrkobjpdm.htm)


## Libaries and Library Lists
* **Libraries** 
  * Objects that store and index other objects.
  * Think of a directory in Unix/Windows
  * Cannot be subdivided into other libraries like folders/directories. 
  * Object type *LIB
* **Library List** - Subset lists of libraries.
  * The first part is made of libraries that the OS requires - System libraries (up to 15) (including QSYS).
  * The second part is dependent on any commands that are executed.
  * The third part is the default library specified by user profile.
  * The fourth part is libraries that are common between users. **QGPL** (Q General Purpose Library) and **QTEMP**.
* **QSYS** - Contains all objects necessary for running the server; It is the only library that can contain other libraries.
  * Stores **Library Descriptions** (Objects that store a library's address).
  * Also stores User Profiles and Device Descriptions.
* **QTEMP** - A temporary library that is created when a user signs on and deleted when signing off.
* **QSYSLIBL** - A system portion of library list containing IBM libraries and objects.
* **QUSRLIBL** - User portion of library list that contains libraries with commonly shared user objects.


## User Profiles
* A **user profile** is an object that stores user specific settings such as passwords, default output queue, and class of user.
* Some settings can override system values. For example, QLANGID controls the OS language and can be changed.
* General rule: If information is specific to you, it belongs in a user profile. If information is common to all, it belongs in a system value.
* User profiles are stored in QSYS.


## Files
* Objects that store data.
* A file is never run, it is read. Only programs are executed.
* DB2 is the database engine built into the OS.
* **Source Physical File**
  * An object used to store program code.
  * A source file can have many **members**.
  * Each separate program is a member of the source physical file.
  * When successfully compiled, a new *PGM object is placed in the current library.
  * All members have 3 fields: a line number, actual program code, and the date the line was entered/changed.


## Members
* A **Source physical file** is a container that stores **members**.
  * QCLLESRC -> physical file to store all CL programs.
  * QRPLESRC -> physical file to store all RPGLE programs.
* A **member** is a program, or group of records which is stored in a source physical file.


## CL (Control Language)
* One pass compiled. 
* Start a CL program with ```PGM``` and end with ```ENDPGM```.
* Compilation
  * Source code ```{ QCLLESRC: { Members: [PGM1: *FILE], Type: CLLE } }```
  * CL Compiler
    * Successfully completed -> *MSGQ DSPMSG
  * Compiled Listing (PGM1) -> *OUTQ WRKSPLF
  * PGM1 *PGM
* Restrictions
  * Only five *FILE per program (display file or database file)
  * Cannot update database files
  * Cannot create reports



## RDp - Rational Developer for Power Systems
* Formerly RDi - Rational Developer for System i
* Based on Eclipse
* Part of the IBM Suite
* Essentially a PC version of PDM (Green screen)
* The license is around $900 :/


## DB2 - The Database
* The IBMi's built-in database.
* Database objects are created using DDS programs or SQL.
* DB2 has **Physical files** (tables) and **Logical files** (indexes or views).


## DDS Programming (Data Description Specifications)
* DDS is used to define data.
* DDS is very sensitive, everything must be typed in uppercase.
* Structure
  * Start out with file level keywords/attributes that apply to the file.
  * **R**ecord format means a layout or a screen.
  * The fields are listed.
  * At end, the access path (**K**ey) information.
* (**R**: Record format name, **K**: Key field)
* Used for creating **physical files**, **logical files**, **display files**, **printer files**


## Display Files
* Source type **DSPF**
* Holds screen design - constants, literals, system constants(date, time, usr), named fields (RPG variables)
* Usage for display files - B (pos 38) - https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/en/ssw_ibm_i_73/rzakc/pos38.htm


## DDS Field Data Types (pos 35)
* **P** - Packed Decimal
* **S** - Zoned Decimal (If no decimal places, then none is assumed)
* **B** - Binary
* **F** - Floating Point
* **A** - Character (If data type blank, character is assumed)
* **H** - Hexadecimal
* **L** - Date
* **T** - Time
* **Z** - TimeStamp
* https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/en/ssw_ibm_i_73/rzakc/rzakcvalentries.htm


## RPGLE Syntax
* Operations https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/en/ssw_ibm_i_73/rzasd/operat.htm
* Built-in Functions https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/en/ssw_ibm_i_73/rzasd/bifs.htm
* Indicators
  * ('0' or *OFF) | ('1' or *ON)
  *  *IN00 - *IN24 are used to map 24 function keys in display file
  *  *INLR - Last Record Indicator (End the RPG Program)
* Syntax
  * end statement ';'
  * comment '//'
  * conditionals '=', '<', '<=', '<>', 'NOT', 'AND', 'OR'
```RPGLE

// DO while
DOW (a <=5 ) AND (b + c = 0);
  EXSR nextRecord;
ENDDO;

// DO Until
DOU x > 10;
  Total = Total + Array(x);
  x = x + 1;
ENDDO;

// SELECT CASE
SELECT;
  WHEN condition;
    //do something
  OTHER;
    //do something else
ENDSL;

// Subroutines
EXSR GETGRADE

BEGSR GETGRADE;
  TOTALGRD = 90;
  LETGRADE = 'A+';
ENDSR;

*INLR = *ON; // Standard way of ending an RPG program
RETURN; // Return control to operating system
```


## Debugging a Bad Compile
* ```WS``` (work with spooled files) option > ```8 - work with spooled files``` > ```5 - display``` 
  * ```b``` - bottom of page
  * ```SHIFT+F4``` - find string
* Search for message codes to find problems with traceback to line number


## CL Programming
* Data Types **\*CHAR**, **\*DEC**, **\*LGL**, **\*INT**, **\*UINT**
* Declare variable ```DCL VAR(&varname) TYPE(*CHAR) LEN(8)```
* Change variable value ```CHGVAR VAR(&varname) VALUE(value)```
* Operators
  * Arithmetic +, -, *, /
  * Character *CAT, ||, *BCAT, |>, *TCAT, |<
  * Relational *EQ, =, *GT, >, *LT, <, *GE, >=, *LE, <=, *NE, *NG, *NL
  * Logical *AND, *OR, *NOT


### CL Examples
```
IF COND(&TIME *LE 120000) + 
  THEN( SNDMSG MSG('GOOD MORNING') TOUSR(DC244A40)
)
ELSE
  CMD( SNDMSG MSG('GOOD AFTERNOON') TOUSR(DC233A40) )

IF (&A = &B) THEN(DO)
    CHGVAR VAR(&IN32) VALUE('1')
    CHGVAR VAR(&IN33) VALUE('0')
  ENDDO
ELSE DO
    CHGVAR VAR(&IN32) VALUE('0')
    CHGVAR VAR(&IN33) VALUE('1')
  ENDDO

// WITHOUT THEN()
IF (&A = &B) DO
    CHGVAR VAR(&IN32) VALUE('1')
    CHGVAR VAR(&IN33) VALUE('0')
  ENDDO

// GOTO
IF (&CHOICE = 'O' *OR &CHOICE = 'o') + 
  DO
    CHGCURLIB IBC233LIB
    WRKOBJPDM IBC233LIB
  ENDDO
ELSE (GOTO END)

END: ENDPGM
```


### CL - Concatenating Strings with *CAT
* **\*CAT** joins together two strings
```
DCL &F1 *CHAR 10 'IBC'
DCL VAR(&F2) TYPE(*CHAR) LEN(10) VALUE('233')
DCL &F3 *CHAR 20
CHGVAR &F3 (&F1 *CAT &F2)
```


### CL - Concatenating Strings with *BCAT
* **\*BCAT** strips trailing blanks of first string and inserts one blank between string concat
```
DCL &F1 *CHAR 10 'Hello'
DCL VAR(&F2) TYPE(*CHAR) LEN(10) VALUE('World!')
DCL &F3 *CHAR 20
CHGVAR &F3 (&F1 *BCAT &F2)
```


### CL - Concatenating Strings with *TCAT
* **\*TCAT** strips first string trailing blanks and then joins
```
DCL &F1 *CHAR 10 'IBC  '
DCL VAR(&F2) TYPE(*CHAR) LEN(10) VALUE('233')
DCL &F3 *CHAR 20
CHGVAR &F3 (&F1 *TCAT  &F2)
```

  
### CL - File Commands
* **DCLF** - Declares a file ```DCLF FILE(MYDSPF)``` or ```DCLF MYDSPF```
* **SNDRCVF** - ```SNDRCVF(MYDSPF)```
  * Send record to screen and wiat for user to enter input, then reads it.
  * Only for Display files, used with input/output screens.
* **DSPATR(PR)** - In display file, set field's display attribute to protected.


### CL - Monitor Message
```
CHGVAR VAR(&A) VALUE(&A / &B)
MONMSG MSGID(MCH1211) EXEC(CHGVAR VAR(&A) VALUE(1))
```
* Monitors for *ESCAPE (black screen of death) and *STATUS messages sent by CL to program message queue.
* Used to handle errors in CL programs


### More CL Examples
```
// SEND DISPLAY FILE TO SCREEN AND READS BACK
//   IF F3 PRESSED, LOOP EXITS AND WRKOBJPDM DONE.
// IF NOT, IT CHECKS IF F5 PRESSED -> IF SO IT INITIALIZES
//   TWO FIELDS AND REDISPLAYS THE SCREEN
SNDRCVF
DOWHILE(&IN03 *NE '1')
  IF (&IN05 *EQ '1') + 
    DO
      CHGVAR VAR(&VAR1) VALUE(0)
      CHGVAR VAR(&VAR2) VALUE(0)
    ENDDO
  SNDRCVF
ENDDO
WRKOBJPDM


SNDRCVF
DOUNTIL(&IN03)
  IF(&IN05) +
    DO
      CHGVAR VAR(&VAR1) VALUE(0)
      CHGVAR VAR(&VAR2) VALUE(0)
    ENDDO
  SNDRCVF
ENDDO
WRKOBJPDM


DCL &LOOPCTL TYPE(*INT) LEN(4)
DCL &LOOPLMT TYPE(*INT) LEN(4)
DOFOR VAR(&LOOPCTL) FROM(1)
  TO(&LOOPLMT) BY(1)
  // SOME COMMANDS
ENDDO


SELECT
  WHEN COND(&TYPE *EQ *CMD) THEN(DO)
    //COMMANDS
  ENDDO
  WHEN COND(&TYPE = *PGM) THEN(DO)
    //COMMANDS
  ENDDO
  OTHERWISE CMD(CHGVAR &BADTYPE '1')
ENDSELECT

//EXECUTE SUBROUTINE
CALLSUBR INIT

//DEFINE SUBROUTINE
SUBR INIT;
  CHGVAR &IN30 '0'
  CHGVAR &MSGS ''
ENDSUBR;

```

### CL - Retrieve and Display
* Display
  * For interactive job ```DSPSYSVAL QSYSLIBL```
* Retrieve
  * For programming process
  * Retrieve system value ```RTVSYSVAL SYSVAL(QSECURITY) RTNVAR(&SECURITY)```
  * Retrieve user profile ```RTVUSRPRF INLPGM(&INLPGM) OWNER(&WONER)```
  * Retrieve job attributes ```RTVJOBA USER(&USER) TYPE(&TYPE)
* Commands

|        | Retrieve  | Display   | Change              |
| ------ | --------- | --------- | ------------------- |
| SYSVAL | RTNSYSVAL | DSPSYSVAL | CHGSYSVAL           |
| USRPRF | RTVUSRPRF | DSPUSRPRF | CHGPRF OR CHGUSRPRF |
| JOBA   | RTVJOBA   | N/A       | N/A                 |
